# Local Historic Research with GIS 

## Table of Contents
**List of Participants**

**Abstract**

**Enhancing the Humanities**

**Environmental Scan**

**History of the Project**

**Work Plan**

**Staff**

**Final Product and Dissemination**

## List of Participants
Claire Noppenberger - University of Richmond Department of Digital Humanities

Robb Bailey - Maryland Park Service 

Maria Day - Maryland State Archives

Rob Schoeberlein - Maryland State Archives 

Lauren Tilton - University of Richmond Department of Digital Humanities 

Russell Cook - AllTrails

Bill Chaney - AllTrails


## Abstract
This project attempts to update trail maps for the Maryland State Parks system by reviewing current trails, adding new foot trails and anecdotal trails, and adding a historical map overlay to digital trail maps. This new set of trail maps would be used to reach many of Maryland's famous historical sites that have been hidden in the state's parks, only to be found through trails that don't exist on standard roadmaps or trail maps. This project would utilize GIS technology and open source trail mapping software and applications to mark these anecdotal trails and make them more accessible for historians and hikers alike. Through the use of GIS technology, historical maps of the area would be compared to modern maps in order to uncover the relative location of these historical towns and sites, as compared to our modern road and trail maps, in order to make historical research of these areas more accessible. Pre-existing user-made trail maps would also be compiled and compared to find the most efficient trail maps, as many trails to these sites are not as direct or have changed due to either manmade or natural shifts in the landscape. These new maps will provide historians and amateurs the tools they need to learn more about Maryland’s past in order to educate the public and guide future decisions about land development and historical preservation. 

## Enhancing the Humanities
Historians have been documenting past events in major American cities like Boston, New York, or Philadelphia, almost since the United States were formed. Past historical events in major cities have been discovered, documented, discussed, and disseminated broadly for years, with ample interest in major events in American history. However, the totality of American history does not rest in major cities, but rather in the small towns, forests, fields, and even ghost towns that have remained throughout the United States’ complicated history. American history is not complete without its people, and its people spread far beyond a short list of major cities and events. History exists and prevails in our neighborhoods, or even in past neighborhoods no longer in use. Ghost towns and past communities provide more authentic human history than textbooks could ever provide history students. Local histories are often overshadowed in favor of grand scale historic research in major cities. 

The state of Maryland’s history is rich with conflict, controversy, and growth. From a largely Catholic colony in the wake of a Protestant revolution, to a disputed Union border state during the Civil War, with thriving industries extending from tobacco to aerospace, Maryland has surely developed through a complicated history. But Maryland’s history does not rest in Annapolis and Baltimore. It rests in suburban and rural towns, mountains, farms, local businesses, and most importantly, its people. But much of this history has been ignored, forgotten, and even taken back by the nature that comprises much of the state’s park systems. Calvert Cliffs, an easily accessible bayside park in southern Maryland, provides visitors and researchers and opportunity to learn more about the prehistoric land of Maryland through its fossils and sediment deposit layers. The Maryland part of Harper’s Ferry in the northwest provides ample signage and historically preserved buildings to maintain the history of Maryland’s part in the Civil War. But Maryland holds so much more history in oft forgotten areas. Ghost towns and the remains of homes litter the Patapsco Valley State Park trails, waiting to be discovered by adventurers or lost hikers. Given the proper tools, historians would be able to bring these more minor, yet important, histories of Maryland to life. However, many of these communities have been taken back by nature or more recent development, leaving aspects of Maryland’s rich history buried in its forests. 

How do we preserve Maryland’s history if we cannot access it? What qualifies as a historic site? How do we get to these sites. These practical questions are what drive much historic research, though with less popular sites, these questions are much more difficult to answer. In order to do history in the most complete fashion, historians must preserve as much of an area’s history as possible in order to complete the narrative of a community’s past. Without the addition of Maryland’s community dynamics and daily life, historians cannot entirely piece together the history of Maryland. Community is the backbone of government, and without an understanding of Maryland’s past communities, we cannot effectively improve on Maryland’s current communities. Thus, it is necessary to place more of a focus on local histories. But because so many of these past communities have either been redeveloped or overgrown, how do we practically perform research? Without access to these overgrown communities, historians cannot truly understand the community dynamics. So how do we gain access to these remote or hidden sites? Many of these sites are contained in Maryland or National State Parks, which include well-worn paths and ample signage to each site. But some are not as clearcut; only the most adventurous or experienced local hikers are able to locate these ghost towns and overgrown locations. Take Daniels, Maryland for example. Daniels was originally a mill town, with sprawling housing for the workers and their families, as well as a few businesses and churches. Once the mill closed down, much of the town was abandoned, only to be taken back by nature. The Daniels Area of Patapsco Valley State Park includes a trail to the buildings that still remain to represent what the town once was. One anecdotal trail on a popular trail mapping site even mentioned walking through the Patapsco River in order to access the correct trail. Without expensive and elaborate GPS systems, an average hiker or historian without ample funding could easily get lost in the Daniels Area part of the state park. Anecdotal trails provide helpful insights into possible locations for research, but without actual trails or georeferenced trail maps, these research efforts would never come to fruition. 

Many trail mapping programs already exist, though none have included a historic map overlay as an option. I have included specific projects in my environmental scan, and this project would effectively be a combination of georeferenced historic maps and georeferenced user-made trail maps. Unlike other projects which require payment for certain map packages or complicated GPS software, this project would create an open-source, free tool to map trails and provide a historic map overlay for those trails so that historians are better able to access remote or hidden sites for research. The georeferenced map overlay would allow historians to pinpoint past communities in Maryland’s landscape and match these sites to current state park trail maps, user-made trail maps, GoogleEarth, and OpenStreetMaps. The trail maps would also be crowd-sourced, using current trail mapping smartphone applications to make the process easy and accessible and to collect as much data as possible. This free, open format will make this tool accessible to researchers with any or no budget, making historical research accessible to those who may not have previously had the means to locate and discover trails to these sites. This kind of accessibility will also make historical and geological research available to amateurs, broadening the field and knowledge of Maryland’s history. Discovering Maryland’s past will help us to literally build our future, as we learn what towns existed and where, why they survived (or didn’t), and what that means for our communities today. 

This project will be done in conjunction with the Maryland Department of Natural Resources and their state park system, the National Parks Service, and AllTrails, an open and user-friendly trail mapping website and application. There is potential for these groups to refrain from participating in the project, overall and with specific aspects of the project. For example, the state parks may refuse to add new signage promoting the trail mapping application, rendering that aspect of the project negligible. Without full participation from AllTrails, the project would then have to create its own trail mapping software, website, and application that is free and openly accessible. In conjunction with an already existent trail mapping program, past user-made trails can be maintained and we will not have to start from scratch while recreating trail maps. If any of the mapping software, applications, open source maps, historic maps, and state park trail maps are suddenly rendered inaccessible to the public, this project would require more funding in order to access these necessary components to the project. The purpose of this project is to create an open source trail mapping app with historic map overlays in order to crowdsource trail data and allow historians on any budget to access these sites. Without publicly accessible maps, the project would be pointless. The application platform is especially vital to the collection of data, as this allows users (hikers, historians, geologists, amateurs in any field) to record trails, take pictures of sites, and describe the best strategy to locate these sites. Within the app, users can use the historic map overlay to discover where a community existed in the past in order to try and find any artifacts or evidence of the past community. Because this app is open to amateurs as well, general knowledge of Maryland’s history can easily be disseminated as amateurs and historians use and add to the app and its maps. History will no longer be something only available to those with the means and institutional support to conduct research. History is meant to be shared within our current communities, not kept behind closed doors. Amateur historians and hikers are also a valuable asset to the collection of historical data, as locals know the landscape much better than a historian from an institution outside of the area. Thus, with a free trail mapping app, a free historic overlay option, and adequate promotion of the app,  historians and hikers are able to contribute to the collection of data and preservation of Maryland’s lost history. 

Through an open source trail mapping system, historic map overlay, user made trail maps, and collaboration from historians and hikers, we will be able to build a better understanding of Maryland’s past communities. With the collaboration of amateurs, locals, and hikers, the community will become more involved in its own history, bringing even more relevance to this project. This project will create or build upon an open source tool to promote community involvement in history, enhancing the purpose and span of historical research in the state of Maryland. 

## Environmental Scan
Of course, many different kinds of trail mapping apps and software already exist. However, each present their own interesting benefits and drawbacks. For example, the OpenCycleMap project created a visual map for cyclists. The creators, Andy Allan and Dave Stubbs, began mapping southwest London, but the reach of the cycle maps has gone global in the past decade. AllTrails, another user-friendly trail mapping website and app, uses OpenCycleMaps as an optional overlay for their premium users. Otherwise, AllTrails provides user-made maps on their website and mobile app to inspire more accessible outdoor recreation across the world. This kind of user-friendly GPS mapping has become fairly popular in the advent of smartphones, with Gaia GPS forming a year before AllTrails. However, Gaia GPS includes less options for comparison with other maps of the same trail, whether they be user-made maps or overlays of satellites or roadmaps. There are numerous other mapping software sites as well, including RouteBuddy and Garmin BaseCamp, though neither site includes a mobile app. Both include free downloadable software for a computer, though neither offer maps for free: RouteBuddy offers maps for about $6.70, while BaseCamp map packages range from $30 to $100. Neither are accessible to the average hiker or historian on a budget. 

GPS converters, like ExpertGPS, provide a link between incompatible GPS systems (including Garmin), making it easier for many different maps to be reconciled. However, beyond the free trial listed on the website, ExpertGPS Home goes for $74.95, with the Pro package listed at $249.95. Though the Pro package provides exact coordinates and distance measurements, the price makes it unusable to the average hiker, and thus irrelevant for the purpose of compiling user-made maps. On the note of pricing, in comparison, Gaia GPS and AllTrails both provide free smartphone applications, making them accessible to any hiker with a smartphone. Easily accessible and user-friendly mapping tools are a necessity for this kind of crowd-sourced data, as the goal of this project is to promote the use of these trail mapping apps in Maryland state parks for the purpose of collecting geographical data in a centralized fashion. Either app would help historians and the Department of Natural Resources to maintain the trails, historical or not. The historic maps of Maryland would come from the University of Texas at Austin’s Perry-Castañeda Library Map Collection, a collection of maps published in the public domain by the U.S. Geological Survey. This extensive source of incredibly detailed maps includes an image of the map and the year of the survey, ranging from Harpers Ferry 1884 to Beltsville in1944. 

David Ramsey has also created a very similar project on a much larger scale, as he created georeferenced historic map overlays for GoogleEarth. He combined and georeferenced over 150,000 historical maps from his collection and collaborations in order to allow users to hear the stories that old maps can tell. Unfortunately, the file with the maps would not open because Google Earth had been updated since this project was published, so it was no longer compatible with Google Earth. Because my project is based on crowdsourced information and updated every time a user records a new trail, the current trail maps would remain up to date and not be rendered incompatible with the historic map overlays. The United States Geological Survey has also created a historic map overlay project with its own maps from the late 19th and early 20th century, the same maps I plan to use as an overlay to trail maps. Historic Map Works’ Residential Genealogy project also has a similar map overlay viewer, including maps from the Osher Map Library and Smith Center for Cartographic Education at the University of South Maine. The maps include georeferenced addresses, though this feature is only available in 15 states, as the family land owner search is only available in 28 states. This resource provides a enormous dataset of map for researchers, cartographers, and map enthusiasts alike, though this project only include GoogleMaps and street maps as base maps, which does not include state park hiking trail maps. Old Maps Online also provides a dataset of searchable maps from past US geological surveys, though this site simply links back to a map on the USGS website. Many of these projects include very extensive datasets, or the same dataset of maps that I have chosen, though none are for the purpose of georeferencing historical sites to trail maps. These maps are useful, though the trail map overlay in combination with the historical map overlay will provide researchers with the means to actually locate these sites. 

## History of the Project
As a combination project of sorts, this project would seek to expand upon the work of past GIS systems, trails, and maps in order to create a historical map overlay on user made trail maps of the state of Maryland. In a personal attempt to reach certain historical sites in Maryland, current trail maps and anecdotal trails were found to be inaccurate and insufficient. The plan, then, was to create a new mapping tool for hikers and historians to create newer and more accurate maps of these areas. Many similar projects, websites, and apps already exist for the purpose of updating old maps, though even these maps are not entirely accurate, as the mapping techniques differ between projects, making it difficult to reconcile maps of the same trail or area. Some sites were also found to be outdated or incompatible with other mapping sites, restricting the accessibility and collaboration amongst other maps and similar projects. Some preliminary research was done into trail mapping technology and historic map overlays, though no projects combining the two were found, rendering this project the first of its kind. 

## Work Plan
First, the project will attempt to coordinate with an already existent trail mapping site, like AllTrails, in order to compile past user-made trails and create a new overlay on an already existent, accessible, and popular site. The historic maps would be obtained from the United States Geological Survey, or from the University of Texas at Austin’s Perry-Castañeda Library Map Collection. The project will use ArcGIS to georeference the historic topographical maps to create a seamless map overlay option for the trail mapping site. The base map for georeferencing will be OpenStreetMap, as this is a very popular open source map used by the trail mapping site. This will make the historic maps compatible with the other map overlays provided by the site, making the project more cohesive than any other historic map georeferencing project. 

Once the historic map overlay has been created, the overlay will be added to the trail mapping mobile phone application. In conjunction with the Maryland Department of Natural Resources, the app will be linked the Maryland State Park’s mobile app, whether it is embedded into the app or a link to download the trail mapping app is provided. Hopefully, funding from this project will render the historic map overlay option free to all users of the app, as well as rendering the Maryland State Parks app free for all users in the parks. Once the app and mobile map overlay options are made free, and thus accessible to the average hiker, signage will be placed in state park campgrounds, parking lots, and trail heads in order to promote the trail mapping feature. With enough support from the state parks and user engagement with the app, anecdotal trails from hikers and adventurers alike will be documented through the app and collected by our team. The team will then compile these user-made maps to create the most efficient maps to historical sites within the Maryland State Park system. Then, with streamlined user-made trail maps and the historical overlay, historical researchers will be able to locate and easily travel to these sites in order to conduct their own research or preservation efforts. 

## Staff
**Claire Noppenberger - Project Director** Claire will act as the primary organizer, researcher, and director of the project, drawing from her experience with research in the University of Richmond’s Digital Humanities department and Digital Scholarship Lab. She will stay on the project until its successful completion. 

**Lauren Tilton - Co-Director** Drawing from her experience and leadership in University of Richmond Department of Digital Humanities, Lauren will provide helpful assistance and advice throughout the completion of this project. 

**Robb Bailey - Collaborator** Through his committee position with the Maryland Park Service, Robb will provide meaningful collaboration between the project and the Maryland Park Service, aiding with the development of the final product and its dissemination through Maryland Park Service locations. 

**Maria Day - Collaborator** Through her committee position with the Maryland State Archives, Maria will assist in the collaboration and promotion of historical preservation efforts in the Maryland Parks system. 

**Rob Schoeberlein - Collaborator** Through his committee position with the Maryland State Archives, Rob will maintain the relationship between this project and future historical preservation efforts in the Maryland Parks system.  

**Russell Cook - Collaborator** As the founder of AllTrails, Russell will maintain the collaborative relationship between this project and his trail mapping site, in order to improve both his site and the historical preservation of Maryland. 

**Bill Chaney - Collaborator** As a software engineer at AllTrails, Bill will utilize his technical skills to aid in the production of the final product and update AllTrails with the overlays created by this project. 

## Final Product and Dissemination
The final product of the project will be a mobile phone application that allows users and historians to record trail maps, view the historic map overlay, and take pictures of the historic sites in order to collect data in a unified manner. The app will provide a link between the AllTrails app and the Maryland State Parks app so that users can view the state park trails alongside user made trail maps on AllTrails, as well as the historic map overlay that this project would create to make the hiking experience streamlined and user-friendly. Because the app will include maps from both the state parks and AllTrails, wheelchair accessible trails will be made available for historians and hikers with disabilities. The app will also include parking as a part of the state park trail maps, making the trails easy to access for visitors who are unfamiliar with the area. Signage promoting the app will also be placed at all trailheads and state park parking lots in order to encourage hikers to use the apps to create trail maps of their hikes, adding to our historians’ dataset. A link to download the app will also be made available on the Maryland Department of Natural Resources’ website. The app and its historic map overlay will be free to take away the cost of data production in order to incentivize the use of the app. A page on the Maryland DNR’s website will document and explain the project to users, historians, or other state departments of natural resources, in order to build an understanding of the project, encourage hikers to create trails, and inspire similar projects in other states. Hopefully, with a widely disseminated app and a clear explanation of the project, historians will be able to use this data to conduct meaningful research into Maryland’s past communities, or implement a similar program in their own states. 



